<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
<p>The Christmas bells drew me forth this morning. With but half-formed
purpose, I walked through soft, hazy sunshine towards the city, and
came into the Cathedral Close, and, after lingering awhile, heard the
first notes of the organ, and so entered. I believe it is more
than thirty years since I was in an English church on Christmas Day. 
The old time and the old faces lived again for me; I saw myself on the
far side of the abyss of years—that self which is not myself at
all, though I mark points of kindred between the beings of then and
now. He who in that other world sat to hear the Christmas gospel,
either heeded it not at all—rapt in his own visions—or listened
only as one in whose blood was heresy. He loved the notes of the
organ, but, even in his childish mind, distinguished clearly between
the music and its local motive. More than that, he could separate
the melody of word and of thought from their dogmatic significance,
enjoying the one whilst wholly rejecting the other. “On
earth peace, good-will to men”—already that line was among
the treasures of his intellect, but only, no doubt, because of its rhythm,
its sonority. Life, to him, was a half-conscious striving for
the harmonic in thought and speech—and through what a tumult of
unmelodious circumstance was he beginning to fight his way!</p>
<p>To-day, I listen with no heretical promptings. The music, whether
of organ or of word, is more to me than ever; the literal meaning causes
me no restiveness. I felt only glad that I had yielded to the
summons of the Christmas bells. I sat among a congregation of
shadows, not in the great cathedral, but in a little parish church far
from here. When I came forth, it astonished me to see the softly
radiant sky, and to tread on the moist earth; my dream expected a wind-swept
canopy of cold grey, and all beneath it the gleam of new-fallen snow. 
It is a piety to turn awhile and live with the dead, and who can so
well indulge it as he whose Christmas is passed in no unhappy solitude? 
I would not now, if I might, be one of a joyous company; it is better
to hear the long-silent voices, and to smile at happy things which I
alone can remember. When I was scarce old enough to understand,
I heard read by the fireside the Christmas stanzas of “In Memoriam.” 
To-night I have taken down the volume, and the voice of so long ago
has read to me once again—read as no other ever did, that voice
which taught me to know poetry, the voice which never spoke to me but
of good and noble things. Would I have those accents overborne
by a living tongue, however welcome its sound at another time? 
Jealously I guard my Christmas solitude.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
