<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
<p>Walking along the road after nightfall, I thought all at once of
London streets, and, by a freak of mind, wished I were there. 
I saw the shining of shop-fronts, the yellow glistening of a wet pavement,
the hurrying people, the cabs, the omnibuses—and I wished I were
amid it all.</p>
<p>What did it mean, but that I wished I were young again? Not
seldom I have a sudden vision of a London street, perhaps the dreariest
and ugliest, which for a moment gives me a feeling of home-sickness. 
Often it is the High Street of Islington, which I have not seen for
a quarter of a century, at least; no thoroughfare in all London less
attractive to the imagination, one would say; but I see myself walking
there—walking with the quick, light step of youth, and there,
of course, is the charm. I see myself, after a long day of work
and loneliness, setting forth from my lodging. For the weather
I care nothing; rain, wind, fog—what does it matter! The
fresh air fills my lungs; my blood circles rapidly; I feel my muscles,
and have a pleasure in the hardness of the stone I tread upon. 
Perhaps I have money in my pocket; I am going to the theatre, and, afterwards,
I shall treat myself to supper—sausage and mashed potatoes, with
a pint of foaming ale. The gusto with which I look forward to
each and every enjoyment! At the pit-door, I shall roll and hustle
amid the throng, and find it amusing. Nothing tires me. 
Late at night, I shall walk all the way back to Islington, most likely
singing as I go. Not because I am happy—nay, I am anything
but that; but my age is something and twenty; I am strong and well.</p>
<p>Put me in a London street this chill, damp night, and I should be
lost in barren discomfort. But in those old days, if I am not
mistaken, I rather preferred the seasons of bad weather; I had, in fact,
the true instinct of townsfolk, which finds pleasure in the triumph
of artificial circumstance over natural conditions, delighting in a
glare and tumult of busy life under hostile heavens which, elsewhere,
would mean shivering ill-content. The theatre, at such a time,
is doubly warm and bright; every shop is a happy harbour of refuge—there,
behind the counter, stand persons quite at their ease, ready to chat
as they serve you; the supper bars make tempting display under their
many gas-jets; the public houses are full of people who all have money
to spend. Then clangs out the piano-organ—and what could
be cheerier!</p>
<p>I have much ado to believe that I really felt so. But then,
if life had not somehow made itself tolerable to me, how should I have
lived through those many years? Human creatures have a marvellous
power of adapting themselves to necessity. Were I, even now, thrown
back into squalid London, with no choice but to abide and work there—should
I not abide and work? Notwithstanding thoughts of the chemist’s
shop, I suppose I should.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
