<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
<p>Talking of vegetables, can the inhabited globe offer anything to
vie with the English potato justly steamed? I do not say that
it is always—or often—to be seen on our tables, for the
steaming of a potato is one of the great achievements of culinary art;
but, when it <i>is</i> set before you, how flesh and spirit exult! 
A modest palate will find more than simple comfort in your boiled potato
of every day, as served in the decent household. New or old, it
is beyond challenge delectable. Try to think that civilized nations
exist to whom this food is unknown—nay, who speak of it, on hearsay,
with contempt! Such critics, little as they suspect it, never
ate a potato in their lives. What they have swallowed under that
name was the vegetable with all its exquisite characteristics vulgarized
or destroyed. Picture the “ball of flour” (as old-fashioned
housewives call it) lying in the dish, diffusing the softest, subtlest
aroma, ready to crumble, all but to melt, as soon as it is touched;
recall its gust and its after-gust, blending so consummately with that
of the joint, hot or cold. Then think of the same potato cooked
in any other way, and what sadness will come upon you!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
