<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
<p>“Homo animal querulum cupide suis incumbens miseriis.” 
I wonder where that comes from. I found it once in Charron, quoted
without reference, and it has often been in my mind—a dreary truth,
well worded. At least, it was a truth for me during many a long
year. Life, I fancy, would very often be insupportable, but for
the luxury of self-compassion; in cases numberless, this it must be
that saves from suicide. For some there is great relief in talking
about their miseries, but such gossips lack the profound solace of misery
nursed in silent brooding. Happily, the trick with me has never
been retrospective; indeed, it was never, even with regard to instant
suffering, a habit so deeply rooted as to become a mastering vice. 
I knew my own weakness when I yielded to it; I despised myself when
it brought me comfort; I could laugh scornfully, even “cupide
meis incumbens miseriis.” And now, thanks be to the unknown
power which rules us, my past has buried its dead. More than that;
I can accept with sober cheerfulness the necessity of all I lived through. 
So it was to be; so it was. For this did Nature shape me; with
what purpose, I shall never know; but, in the sequence of things eternal,
this was my place.</p>
<p>Could I have achieved so much philosophy if, as I ever feared, the
closing years of my life had passed in helpless indigence? Should
I not have sunk into lowest depths of querulous self-pity, grovelling
there with eyes obstinately averted from the light above?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
