<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
<p>As often as I survey my bookshelves I am reminded of Lamb’s
“ragged veterans.” Not that all my volumes came from
the second-hand stall; many of them were neat enough in new covers,
some were even stately in fragrant bindings, when they passed into my
hands. But so often have I removed, so rough has been the treatment
of my little library at each change of place, and, to tell the truth,
so little care have I given to its well-being at normal times (for in
all practical matters I am idle and inept), that even the comeliest
of my books show the results of unfair usage. More than one has
been foully injured by a great nail driven into a packing-case—this
but the extreme instance of the wrongs they have undergone. Now
that I have leisure and peace of mind, I find myself growing more careful—an
illustration of the great truth that virtue is made easy by circumstance. 
But I confess that, so long as a volume hold together, I am not much
troubled as to its outer appearance.</p>
<p>I know men who say they had as lief read any book in a library copy
as in one from their own shelf. To me that is unintelligible. 
For one thing, I know every book of mine by its <i>scent</i>, and I
have but to put my nose between the pages to be reminded of all sorts
of things. My Gibbon, for example, my well-bound eight-volume
Milman edition, which I have read and read and read again for more than
thirty years—never do I open it but the scent of the noble page
restores to me all the exultant happiness of that moment when I received
it as a prize. Or my Shakespeare, the great Cambridge Shakespeare—it
has an odour which carries me yet further back in life; for these volumes
belonged to my father, and before I was old enough to read them with
understanding, it was often permitted me, as a treat, to take down one
of them from the bookcase, and reverently to turn the leaves. 
The volumes smell exactly as they did in that old time, and what a strange
tenderness comes upon me when I hold one of them in hand. For
that reason I do not often read Shakespeare in this edition. My
eyes being good as ever, I take the Globe volume, which I bought in
days when such a purchase was something more than an extravagance; wherefore
I regard the book with that peculiar affection which results from sacrifice.</p>
<p>Sacrifice—in no drawing-room sense of the word. Dozens
of my books were purchased with money which ought to have been spent
upon what are called the necessaries of life. Many a time I have
stood before a stall, or a bookseller’s window, torn by conflict
of intellectual desire and bodily need. At the very hour of dinner,
when my stomach clamoured for food, I have been stopped by sight of
a volume so long coveted, and marked at so advantageous a price, that
I <i>could</i> not let it go; yet to buy it meant pangs of famine. 
My Heyne’s <i>Tibullus</i> was grasped at such a moment. 
It lay on the stall of the old book-shop in Goodge Street—a stall
where now and then one found an excellent thing among quantities of
rubbish. Sixpence was the price—sixpence! At that
time I used to eat my mid-day meal (of course my dinner) at a coffee-shop
in Oxford Street, one of the real old coffee-shops, such as now, I suppose,
can hardly be found. Sixpence was all I had—yes, all I had
in the world; it would purchase a plate of meat and vegetables. 
But I did not dare to hope that the <i>Tibullus</i> would wait until
the morrow, when a certain small sum fell due to me. I paced the
pavement, fingering the coppers in my pocket, eyeing the stall, two
appetites at combat within me. The book was bought and I went
home with it, and as I made a dinner of bread and butter I gloated over
the pages.</p>
<p>In this <i>Tibullus</i> I found pencilled on the last page: “Perlegi,
Oct. 4, 1792.” Who was that possessor of the book, nearly
a hundred years ago? There was no other inscription. I like
to imagine some poor scholar, poor and eager as I myself, who bought
the volume with drops of his blood, and enjoyed the reading of it even
as I did. How much <i>that</i> was I could not easily say. 
Gentle-hearted Tibullus!—of whom there remains to us a poet’s
portrait more delightful, I think, than anything of the kind in Roman
literature.</p>
<blockquote><div><p>An tacitum silvas inter reptare salubres,<br/>
Curantem quidquid dignum sapiente bonoque est?</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>So with many another book on the thronged shelves. To take
them down is to recall, how vividly, a struggle and a triumph. 
In those days money represented nothing to me, nothing I cared to think
about, but the acquisition of books. There were books of which
I had passionate need, books more necessary to me than bodily nourishment. 
I could see them, of course, at the British Museum, but that was not
at all the same thing as having and holding them, my own property, on
my own shelf. Now and then I have bought a volume of the raggedest
and wretchedest aspect, dishonoured with foolish scribbling, torn, blotted—no
matter, I liked better to read out of that than out of a copy that was
not mine. But I was guilty at times of mere self-indulgence; a
book tempted me, a book which was not one of those for which I really
craved, a luxury which prudence might bid me forego. As, for instance,
my <i>Jung-Stilling</i>. It caught my eye in Holywell Street;
the name was familiar to me in <i>Wahrheit und Dichtung</i>, and curiosity
grew as I glanced over the pages. But that day I resisted; in
truth, I could not afford the eighteen-pence, which means that just
then I was poor indeed. Twice again did I pass, each time assuring
myself that <i>Jung-Stilling</i> had found no purchaser. There
came a day when I was in funds. I see myself hastening to Holywell
Street (in those days my habitual pace was five miles an hour), I see
the little grey old man with whom I transacted my business—what
was his name?—the bookseller who had been, I believe, a Catholic
priest, and still had a certain priestly dignity about him. He
took the volume, opened it, mused for a moment, then, with a glance
at me, said, as if thinking aloud: “Yes, I wish I had time to
read it.”</p>
<p>Sometimes I added the labour of a porter to my fasting endured for
the sake of books. At the little shop near Portland Road Station
I came upon a first edition of Gibbon, the price an absurdity—I
think it was a shilling a volume. To possess those clean-paged
quartos I would have sold my coat. As it happened, I had not money
enough with me, but sufficient at home. I was living at Islington. 
Having spoken with the bookseller, I walked home, took the cash, walked
back again, and—carried the tomes from the west end of Euston
Road to a street in Islington far beyond the <i>Angel</i>. I did
it in two journeys—this being the only time in my life when I
thought of Gibbon in avoirdupois. Twice—three times, reckoning
the walk for the money—did I descend Euston Road and climb Pentonville
on that occasion. Of the season and the weather I have no recollection;
my joy in the purchase I had made drove out every other thought. 
Except, indeed, of the weight. I had infinite energy, but not
much muscular strength, and the end of the last journey saw me upon
a chair, perspiring, flaccid, aching—exultant!</p>
<p>The well-to-do person would hear this story with astonishment. 
Why did I not get the bookseller to send me the volumes? Or, if
I could not wait, was there no omnibus along that London highway? 
How could I make the well-to-do person understand that I did not feel
able to afford, that day, one penny more than I had spent on the book? 
No, no, such labour-saving expenditure did not come within my scope;
whatever I enjoyed I earned it, literally, by the sweat of my brow. 
In those days I hardly knew what it was to travel by omnibus. 
I have walked London streets for twelve and fifteen hours together without
ever a thought of saving my legs, or my time, by paying for waftage. 
Being poor as poor can be, there were certain things I had to renounce,
and this was one of them.</p>
<p>Years after, I sold my first edition of Gibbon for even less than
it cost me; it went with a great many other fine books in folio and
quarto, which I could not drag about with me in my constant removals;
the man who bought them spoke of them as “tomb-stones.” 
Why has Gibbon no market value? Often has my heart ached with
regret for those quartos. The joy of reading the Decline and Fall
in that fine type! The page was appropriate to the dignity of
the subject; the mere sight of it tuned one’s mind. I suppose
I could easily get another copy now; but it would not be to me what
that other was, with its memory of dust and toil.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
