<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
<p>On my breakfast table there is a pot of honey. Not the manufactured
stuff sold under that name in shops, but honey of the hive, brought
to me by a neighbouring cottager whose bees often hum in my garden. 
It gives, I confess, more pleasure to my eye than to my palate; but
I like to taste of it, because it is honey.</p>
<p>There is as much difference, said Johnson, between a lettered and
an unlettered man as between the living and the dead; and, in a way,
it was no extravagance. Think merely how one’s view of common
things is affected by literary association. What were honey to
me if I knew nothing of Hymettus and Hybla?—if my mind had no
stores of poetry, no memories of romance? Suppose me town-pent,
the name might bring with it some pleasantness of rustic odour; but
of what poor significance even that, if the country were to me mere
grass and corn and vegetables, as to the man who has never read nor
wished to read. For the Poet is indeed a Maker: above the world
of sense, trodden by hidebound humanity, he builds that world of his
own whereto is summoned the unfettered spirit. Why does it delight
me to see the bat flitting at dusk before my window, or to hear the
hoot of the owl when all the ways are dark? I might regard the
bat with disgust, and the owl either with vague superstition or not
heed it at all. But these have their place in the poet’s
world, and carry me above this idle present.</p>
<p>I once passed a night in a little market-town where I had arrived
tired and went to bed early. I slept forthwith, but was presently
awakened by I knew not what; in the darkness there sounded a sort of
music, and, as my brain cleared, I was aware of the soft chiming of
church bells. Why, what hour could it be? I struck a light
and looked at my watch. Midnight. Then a glow came over
me. “We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow!” 
Never till then had <i>I</i> heard them. And the town in which
I slept was Evesham, but a few miles from Stratford-on-Avon. What
if those midnight bells had been to me but as any other, and I had reviled
them for breaking my sleep?—Johnson did not much exaggerate.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
