<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
<p>As I walked to-day in the golden sunlight—this warm, still
day on the far verge of autumn—there suddenly came to me a thought
which checked my step, and for the moment half bewildered me. 
I said to myself: My life is over. Surely I ought to have been
aware of that simple fact; certainly it has made part of my meditation,
has often coloured my mood; but the thing had never definitely shaped
itself, ready in words for the tongue. My life is over. 
I uttered the sentence once or twice, that my ear might test its truth. 
Truth undeniable, however strange; undeniable as the figure of my age
last birthday.</p>
<p>My age? At this time of life, many a man is bracing himself
for new efforts, is calculating on a decade or two of pursuit and attainment. 
I, too, may perhaps live for some years; but for me there is no more
activity, no ambition. I have had my chance—and I see what
I made of it.</p>
<p>The thought was for an instant all but dreadful. What! 
I, who only yesterday was a young man, planning, hoping, looking forward
to life as to a practically endless career, I, who was so vigorous and
scornful, have come to this day of definite retrospect? How is
it possible? But, I have done nothing; I have had no time; I have
only been preparing myself—a mere apprentice to life. My
brain is at some prank; I am suffering a momentary delusion; I shall
shake myself, and return to common sense—to my schemes and activities
and eager enjoyments.</p>
<p>Nevertheless, my life is over.</p>
<p>What a little thing! I knew how the philosophers had spoken;
I repeated their musical phrases about the mortal span—yet never
till now believed them. And this is all? A man’s life
can be so brief and so vain? Idly would I persuade myself that
life, in the true sense, is only now beginning; that the time of sweat
and fear was not life at all, and that it now only depends upon my will
to lead a worthy existence. That may be a sort of consolation,
but it does not obscure the truth that I shall never again see possibilities
and promises opening before me. I have “retired,”
and for me as truly as for the retired tradesman, life is over. 
I can look back upon its completed course, and what a little thing! 
I am tempted to laugh; I hold myself within the limit of a smile.</p>
<p>And that is best, to smile, not in scorn, but in all forbearance,
without too much self-compassion. After all, that dreadful aspect
of the thing never really took hold of me; I could put it by without
much effort. Life is done—and what matter? Whether
it has been, in sum, painful or enjoyable, even now I cannot say—a
fact which in itself should prevent me from taking the loss too seriously. 
What does it matter? Destiny with the hidden face decreed that
I should come into being, play my little part, and pass again into silence;
is it mine either to approve or to rebel? Let me be grateful that
I have suffered no intolerable wrong, no terrible woe of flesh or spirit,
such as others—alas! alas!—have found in their lot. 
Is it not much to have accomplished so large a part of the mortal journey
with so much ease? If I find myself astonished at its brevity
and small significance, why, that is my own fault; the voices of those
gone before had sufficiently warned me. Better to see the truth
now, and accept it, than to fall into dread surprise on some day of
weakness, and foolishly to cry against fate. I will be glad rather
than sorry, and think of the thing no more.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
