<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
<p>It has occurred to me that one might define Art as: an expression,
satisfying and abiding, of the zest of life. This is applicable
to every form of Art devised by man, for, in his creative moment, whether
he produce a great drama or carve a piece of foliage in wood, the artist
is moved and inspired by supreme enjoyment of some aspect of the world
about him; an enjoyment in itself keener than that experienced by another
man, and intensified, prolonged, by the power—which comes to him
we know not how—of recording in visible or audible form that emotion
of rare vitality. Art, in some degree, is within the scope of
every human being, were he but the ploughman who utters a few would-be
melodious notes, the mere outcome of health and strength, in the field
at sunrise; he sings, or tries to, prompted by an unusual gusto in being,
and the rude stave is all his own. Another was he, who also at
the plough, sang of the daisy, of the field-mouse, or shaped the rhythmic
tale of Tam o’ Shanter. Not only had life a zest for him
incalculably stronger and subtler than that which stirs the soul of
Hodge, but he uttered it in word and music such as go to the heart of
mankind, and hold a magic power for ages.</p>
<p>For some years there has been a great deal of talk about Art in our
country. It began, I suspect, when the veritable artistic impulse
of the Victorian time had flagged, when the energy of a great time was
all but exhausted. Principles always become a matter of vehement
discussion when practice is at ebb. Not by taking thought does
one become an artist, or grow even an inch in that direction—which
is not at all the same as saying that he who <i>is</i> an artist cannot
profit by conscious effort. Goethe (the example so often urged
by imitators unlike him in every feature of humanity) took thought enough
about his Faust; but what of those youthtime lyrics, not the least precious
of his achievements, which were scribbled as fast as pen could go, thwartwise
on the paper, because he could not stop to set it straight? Dare
I pen, even for my own eyes, the venerable truth that an artist is born
and not made? It seems not superfluous, in times which have heard
disdainful criticism of Scott, on the ground that he had no artistic
conscience, that he scribbled without a thought of style, that he never
elaborated his scheme before beginning—as Flaubert, of course
you know, invariably did. Why, after all, has one not heard that
a certain William Shakespeare turned out his so-called works of art
with something like criminal carelessness? Is it not a fact that
a bungler named Cervantes was so little in earnest about his Art that,
having in one chapter described the stealing of Sancho’s donkey,
he presently, in mere forgetfulness, shows us Sancho riding on Dapple,
as if nothing had happened? Does not one Thackeray shamelessly
avow on the last page of a grossly “subjective” novel that
he had killed Lord Farintosh’s mother at one page and brought
her to life again at another? These sinners against Art are none
the less among the world’s supreme artists, for they <i>lived</i>,
in a sense, in a degree, unintelligible to these critics of theirs,
and their work is an expression, satisfying and abiding, of the zest
of life.</p>
<p>Some one, no doubt, hit upon this definition of mine long ago. 
It doesn’t matter; is it the less original with me? Not
long since I should have fretted over the possibility, for my living
depended on an avoidance of even seeming plagiarism. Now I am
at one with Lord Foppington, and much disposed to take pleasure in the
natural sprouts of my own wit—without troubling whether the same
idea has occurred to others. Suppose me, in total ignorance of
Euclid, to have discovered even the simplest of his geometrical demonstrations,
shall I be crestfallen when some one draws attention to the book? 
These natural sprouts are, after all, the best products of our life;
it is a mere accident that they may have no value in the world’s
market. One of my conscious efforts, in these days of freedom,
is to live intellectually for myself. Formerly, when in reading
I came upon anything that impressed or delighted me, down it went in
my note-book, for “use.” I could not read a striking
verse, or sentence of prose, without thinking of it as an apt quotation
in something I might write—one of the evil results of a literary
life. Now that I strive to repel this habit of thought, I find
myself asking: To what end, then, do I read and remember? Surely
as foolish a question as ever man put to himself. You read for
your own pleasure, for your solace and strengthening. Pleasure,
then, purely selfish? Solace which endures for an hour, and strengthening
for no combat? Ay, but I know, I know. With what heart should
I live here in my cottage, waiting for life’s end, were it not
for those hours of seeming idle reading?</p>
<p>I think sometimes, how good it were had I some one by me to listen
when I am tempted to read a passage aloud. Yes, but is there any
mortal in the whole world upon whom I could invariably depend for sympathetic
understanding?—nay, who would even generally be at one with me
in my appreciation. Such harmony of intelligences is the rarest
thing. All through life we long for it: the desire drives us,
like a demon, into waste places; too often ends by plunging us into
mud and morass. And, after all, we learn that the vision was illusory. 
To every man is it decreed: thou shalt live alone. Happy they
who imagine that they have escaped the common lot; happy, whilst they
imagine it. Those to whom no such happiness has ever been granted
at least avoid the bitterest of disillusions. And is it not always
good to face a truth, however discomfortable? The mind which renounces,
once and for ever, a futile hope, has its compensation in ever-growing
calm.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
