<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
<p>I am no friend of the people. As a force, by which the tenor
of the time is conditioned, they inspire me with distrust, with fear;
as a visible multitude, they make me shrink aloof, and often move me
to abhorrence. For the greater part of my life, the people signified
to me the London crowd, and no phrase of temperate meaning would utter
my thoughts of them under that aspect. The people as country-folk
are little known to me; such glimpses as I have had of them do not invite
to nearer acquaintance. Every instinct of my being is anti-democratic,
and I dread to think of what our England may become when Demos rules
irresistibly.</p>
<p>Right or wrong, this is my temper. But he who should argue
from it that I am intolerant of all persons belonging to a lower social
rank than my own would go far astray. Nothing is more rooted in
my mind than the vast distinction between the individual and the class. 
Take a man by himself, and there is generally some reason to be found
in him, some disposition for good; mass him with his fellows in the
social organism, and ten to one he becomes a blatant creature, without
a thought of his own, ready for any evil to which contagion prompts
him. It is because nations tend to stupidity and baseness that
mankind moves so slowly; it is because individuals have a capacity for
better things that it moves at all.</p>
<p>In my youth, looking at this man and that, I marvelled that humanity
had made so little progress. Now, looking at men in the multitude,
I marvel that they have advanced so far.</p>
<p>Foolishly arrogant as I was, I used to judge the worth of a person
by his intellectual power and attainment. I could see no good
where there was no logic, no charm where there was no learning. 
Now I think that one has to distinguish between two forms of intelligence,
that of the brain, and that of the heart, and I have come to regard
the second as by far the more important. I guard myself against
saying that intelligence does not matter; the fool is ever as noxious
as he is wearisome. But assuredly the best people I have known
were saved from folly not by the intellect but by the heart. They
come before me, and I see them greatly ignorant, strongly prejudiced,
capable of the absurdest mis-reasoning; yet their faces shine with the
supreme virtues, kindness, sweetness, modesty, generosity. Possessing
these qualities, they at the same time understand how to use them; they
have the intelligence of the heart.</p>
<p>This poor woman who labours for me in my house is even such a one. 
From the first I thought her an unusually good servant; after three
years of acquaintance, I find her one of the few women I have known
who merit the term of excellent. She can read and write—that
is all. More instruction would, I am sure, have harmed her, for
it would have confused her natural motives, without supplying any clear
ray of mental guidance. She is fulfilling the offices for which
she was born, and that with a grace of contentment, a joy of conscientiousness,
which puts her high among civilized beings. Her delight is in
order and in peace; what greater praise can be given to any of the children
of men?</p>
<p>The other day she told me a story of the days gone by. Her
mother, at the age of twelve, went into domestic service; but on what
conditions, think you? The girl’s father, an honest labouring
man, <i>paid</i> the person whose house she entered one shilling a week
for her instruction in the duties she wished to undertake. What
a grinning stare would come to the face of any labourer nowadays, who
should be asked to do the like! I no longer wonder that my housekeeper
so little resembles the average of her kind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
