<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
<p>I cannot close my eyes upon this day without setting down some record
of it; yet the foolish insufficiency of words! At sunrise I looked
forth; nowhere could I discern a cloud the size of a man’s hand;
the leaves quivered gently, as if with joy in the divine morning which
glistened upon their dew. At sunset I stood in the meadow above
my house, and watched the red orb sink into purple mist, whilst in the
violet heaven behind me rose the perfect moon. All between, through
the soft circling of the dial’s shadow, was loveliness and quiet
unutterable. Never, I could fancy, did autumn clothe in such magnificence
the elms and beeches; never, I should think, did the leafage on my walls
blaze in such royal crimson. It was no day for wandering; under
a canopy of blue or gold, where the eye could fall on nothing that was
not beautiful, enough to be at one with Nature in dreamy rest. 
From stubble fields sounded the long caw of rooks; a sleepy crowing
ever and anon told of the neighbour farm; my doves cooed above their
cot. Was it for five minutes, or was it for an hour, that I watched
the yellow butterfly wafted as by an insensible tremor of the air amid
the garden glintings? In every autumn there comes one such flawless
day. None that I have known brought me a mind so touched to the
fitting mood of welcome, and so fulfilled the promise of its peace.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
