<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
<p>It is a pleasant thing enough to be able to spend a little money
without fear when the desire for some indulgence is strong upon one;
but how much pleasanter the ability to give money away! Greatly
as I relish the comforts of my wonderful new life, no joy it has brought
me equals that of coming in aid to another’s necessity. 
The man for ever pinched in circumstances can live only for himself. 
It is all very well to talk about doing moral good; in practice, there
is little scope or hope for anything of that kind in a state of material
hardship. To-day I have sent S--- a cheque for fifty pounds; it
will come as a very boon of heaven, and assuredly blesseth him that
gives as much as him that takes. A poor fifty pounds, which the
wealthy fool throws away upon some idle or base fantasy, and never thinks
of it; yet to S--- it will mean life and light. And I, to whom
this power of benefaction is such a new thing, sign the cheque with
a hand trembling, so glad and proud I am. In the days gone by,
I have sometimes given money, but with trembling of another kind; it
was as likely as not that I myself, some black foggy morning, might
have to go begging for my own dire needs. That is one of the bitter
curses of poverty; it leaves no right to be generous. Of my abundance—abundance
to me, though starveling pittance in the view of everyday prosperity—I
can give with happiest freedom; I feel myself a man, and no crouching
slave with his back ever ready for the lash of circumstance. There
are those, I know, who thank the gods amiss, and most easily does this
happen in the matter of wealth. But oh, how good it is to desire
little, and to have a little more than enough!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
