<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
<p>I was taking a meal once at a London restaurant—not one of
the great eating-places to which men most resort, but a small establishment
on the same model in a quiet neighbourhood—when there entered,
and sat down at the next table, a young man of the working class, whose
dress betokened holiday. A glance told me that he felt anything
but at ease; his mind misgave him as he looked about the long room and
at the table before him; and when a waiter came to offer him the card,
he stared blankly in sheepish confusion. Some strange windfall,
no doubt, had emboldened him to enter for the first time such a place
as this, and now that he was here, he heartily wished himself out in
the street again. However, aided by the waiter’s suggestions,
he gave an order for a beef-steak and vegetables. When the dish
was served, the poor fellow simply could not make a start upon it; he
was embarrassed by the display of knives and forks, by the arrangement
of the dishes, by the sauce bottles and the cruet-stand, above all,
no doubt, by the assembly of people not of his class, and the unwonted
experience of being waited upon by a man with a long shirt-front. 
He grew red; he made the clumsiest and most futile efforts to transport
the meat to his plate; food was there before him, but, like a very Tantalus,
he was forbidden to enjoy it. Observing with all discretion, I
at length saw him pull out his pocket handkerchief, spread it on the
table, and, with a sudden effort, fork the meat off the dish into this
receptacle. The waiter, aware by this time of the customer’s
difficulty, came up and spoke a word to him. Abashed into anger,
the young man roughly asked what he had to pay. It ended in the
waiter’s bringing a newspaper, wherein he helped to wrap up meat
and vegetables. Money was flung down, and the victim of a mistaken
ambition hurriedly departed, to satisfy his hunger amid less unfamiliar
surroundings.</p>
<p>It was a striking and unpleasant illustration of social differences. 
Could such a thing happen in any country but England? I doubt
it. The sufferer was of decent appearance, and, with ordinary
self-command, might have taken his meal in the restaurant like any one
else, quite unnoticed. But he belonged to a class which, among
all classes in the world, is distinguished by native clownishness and
by unpliability to novel circumstance. The English lower ranks
had need be marked by certain peculiar virtues to atone for their deficiencies
in other respects.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
