<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
<p>The early coming of spring in this happy Devon gladdens my heart. 
I think with chill discomfort of those parts of England where the primrose
shivers beneath a sky of threat rather than of solace. Honest
winter, snow-clad and with the frosted beard, I can welcome not uncordially;
but that long deferment of the calendar’s promise, that weeping
gloom of March and April, that bitter blast outraging the honour of
May—how often has it robbed me of heart and hope. Here,
scarce have I assured myself that the last leaf has fallen, scarce have
I watched the glistening of hoar-frost upon the evergreens, when a breath
from the west thrills me with anticipation of bud and bloom. Even
under this grey-billowing sky, which tells that February is still in
rule:—</p>
<blockquote><div><p>Mild winds shake the elder brake,<br/>
And the wandering herdsmen know<br/>
That the whitethorn soon will blow.</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>I have been thinking of those early years of mine in London, when
the seasons passed over me unobserved, when I seldom turned a glance
towards the heavens, and felt no hardship in the imprisonment of boundless
streets. It is strange now to remember that for some six or seven
years I never looked upon a meadow, never travelled even so far as to
the tree-bordered suburbs. I was battling for dear life; on most
days I could not feel certain that in a week’s time I should have
food and shelter. It would happen, to be sure, that in hot noons
of August my thoughts wandered to the sea; but so impossible was the
gratification of such desire that it never greatly troubled me. 
At times, indeed, I seem all but to have forgotten that people went
away for holiday. In those poor parts of the town where I dwelt,
season made no perceptible difference; there were no luggage-laden cabs
to remind me of joyous journeys; the folk about me went daily to their
toil as usual, and so did I. I remember afternoons of languor,
when books were a weariness, and no thought could be squeezed out of
the drowsy brain; then would I betake myself to one of the parks, and
find refreshment without any enjoyable sense of change. Heavens,
how I laboured in those days! And how far I was from thinking
of myself as a subject for compassion! That came later, when my
health had begun to suffer from excess of toil, from bad air, bad food
and many miseries; then awoke the maddening desire for countryside and
sea-beach—and for other things yet more remote. But in the
years when I toiled hardest and underwent what now appear to me hideous
privations, of a truth I could not be said to suffer at all. I
did not suffer, for I had no sense of weakness. My health was
proof against everything, and my energies defied all malice of circumstance. 
With however little encouragement, I had infinite hope. Sound
sleep (often in places I now dread to think of) sent me fresh to the
battle each morning, my breakfast, sometimes, no more than a slice of
bread and a cup of water. As human happiness goes, I am not sure
that I was not then happy.</p>
<p>Most men who go through a hard time in their youth are supported
by companionship. London has no <i>pays latin</i>, but hungry
beginners in literature have generally their suitable comrades, garreteers
in the Tottenham Court Road district, or in unredeemed Chelsea; they
make their little <i>vie de Bohème</i>, and are consciously proud
of it. Of my position, the peculiarity was that I never belonged
to any cluster; I shrank from casual acquaintance, and, through the
grim years, had but one friend with whom I held converse. It was
never my instinct to look for help, to seek favour for advancement;
whatever step I gained was gained by my own strength. Even as
I disregarded favour so did I scorn advice; no counsel would I ever
take but that of my own brain and heart. More than once I was
driven by necessity to beg from strangers the means of earning bread,
and this of all my experiences was the bitterest; yet I think I should
have found it worse still to incur a debt to some friend or comrade. 
The truth is that I have never learnt to regard myself as a “member
of society.” For me, there have always been two entities—myself
and the world, and the normal relation between these two has been hostile. 
Am I not still a lonely man, as far as ever from forming part of the
social order?</p>
<p>This, of which I once was scornfully proud, seems to me now, if not
a calamity, something I would not choose if life were to live again.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
