<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
<p>Walking in a favourite lane to-day, I found it covered with shed
blossoms of the hawthorn. Creamy white, fragrant even in ruin,
lay scattered the glory of the May. It told me that spring is
over.</p>
<p>Have I enjoyed it as I should? Since the day that brought me
freedom, four times have I seen the year’s new birth, and always,
as the violet yielded to the rose, I have known a fear that I had not
sufficiently prized this boon of heaven whilst it was with me. 
Many hours I have spent shut up among my books, when I might have been
in the meadows. Was the gain equivalent? Doubtfully, diffidently,
I hearken what the mind can plead.</p>
<p>I recall my moments of delight, the recognition of each flower that
unfolded, the surprise of budding branches clothed in a night with green. 
The first snowy gleam upon the blackthorn did not escape me. By
its familiar bank, I watched for the earliest primrose, and in its copse
I found the anemone. Meadows shining with buttercups, hollows
sunned with the marsh marigold held me long at gaze. I saw the
sallow glistening with its cones of silvery fur, and splendid with dust
of gold. These common things touch me with more of admiration
and of wonder each time I behold them. They are once more gone. 
As I turn to summer, a misgiving mingles with my joy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
