<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
<p>There is to me an odd pathos in the literature of vegetarianism. 
I remember the day when I read these periodicals and pamphlets with
all the zest of hunger and poverty, vigorously seeking to persuade myself
that flesh was an altogether superfluous, and even a repulsive, food. 
If ever such things fall under my eyes nowadays, I am touched with a
half humorous compassion for the people whose necessity, not their will,
consents to this chemical view of diet. There comes before me
a vision of certain vegetarian restaurants, where, at a minim outlay,
I have often enough made believe to satisfy my craving stomach; where
I have swallowed “savoury cutlet,” “vegetable steak,”
and I know not what windy insufficiencies tricked up under specious
names. One place do I recall where you had a complete dinner for
sixpence—I dare not try to remember the items. But well
indeed do I see the faces of the guests—poor clerks and shopboys,
bloodless girls and women of many sorts—all endeavouring to find
a relish in lentil soup and haricot something-or-other. It was
a grotesquely heart-breaking sight.</p>
<p>I hate with a bitter hatred the names of lentils and haricots—those
pretentious cheats of the appetite, those tabulated humbugs, those certificated
aridities calling themselves human food! An ounce of either, we
are told, is equivalent to—how many pounds?—of the best
rump-steak. There are not many ounces of common sense in the brain
of him who proves it, or of him who believes it. In some countries,
this stuff is eaten by choice; in England only dire need can compel
to its consumption. Lentils and haricots are not merely insipid;
frequent use of them causes something like nausea. Preach and
tabulate as you will, the English palate—which is the supreme
judge—rejects this farinaceous makeshift. Even as it rejects
vegetables without the natural concomitant of meat; as it rejects oatmeal-porridge
and griddle-cakes for a mid-day meal; as it rejects lemonade and ginger-ale
offered as substitutes for honest beer.</p>
<p>What is the intellectual and moral state of that man who really believes
that chemical analysis can be an equivalent for natural gusto?—I
will get more nourishment out of an inch of right Cambridge sausage;
aye, out of a couple of ounces of honest tripe; than can be yielded
me by half a hundredweight of the best lentils ever grown.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
