<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
<p>Is there, at this moment, any boy of twenty, fairly educated, but
without means, without help, with nothing but the glow in his brain
and steadfast courage in his heart, who sits in a London garret, and
writes for dear life? There must be, I suppose; yet all that I
have read and heard of late years about young writers, shows them in
a very different aspect. No garretteers, these novelists and journalists
awaiting their promotion. They eat—and entertain their critics—at
fashionable restaurants; they are seen in expensive seats at the theatre;
they inhabit handsome flats—photographed for an illustrated paper
on the first excuse. At the worst, they belong to a reputable
club, and have garments which permit them to attend a garden party or
an evening “at home” without attracting unpleasant notice. 
Many biographical sketches have I read, during the last decade, making
personal introduction of young Mr. This or young Miss That, whose book
was—as the sweet language of the day will have it—“booming”;
but never one in which there was a hint of stern struggle, of the pinched
stomach and frozen fingers. I surmise that the path of “literature”
is being made too easy. Doubtless it is a rare thing nowadays
for a lad whose education ranks him with the upper middle class to find
himself utterly without resources, should he wish to devote himself
to the profession of letters. And there is the root of the matter;
writing has come to be recognized as a profession, almost as cut-and-dried
as church or law; a lad may go into it with full parental approval,
with ready avuncular support. I heard not long ago of an eminent
lawyer, who had paid a couple of hundred per annum for his son’s
instruction in the art of fiction—yea, the art of fiction—by
a not very brilliant professor of that art. Really, when one comes
to think of it, an astonishing fact, a fact vastly significant. 
Starvation, it is true, does not necessarily produce fine literature;
but one feels uneasy about these carpet-authors. To the two or
three who have a measure of conscience and vision, I could wish, as
the best thing, some calamity which would leave them friendless in the
streets. They would perish, perhaps. But set that possibility
against the all but certainty of their present prospect—fatty
degeneration of the soul; and is it not acceptable?</p>
<p>I thought of this as I stood yesterday watching a noble sunset, which
brought back to my memory the sunsets of a London autumn, thirty years
ago; more glorious, it seems to me, than any I have since beheld. 
It happened that, on one such evening, I was by the river at Chelsea,
with nothing to do except to feel that I was hungry, and to reflect
that, before morning, I should be hungrier still. I loitered upon
Battersea Bridge—the old picturesque wooden bridge, and there
the western sky took hold upon me. Half an hour later, I was speeding
home. I sat down, and wrote a description of what I had seen,
and straightway sent it to an evening newspaper, which, to my astonishment,
published the thing next day—“On Battersea Bridge.” 
How proud I was of that little bit of writing! I should not much
like to see it again, for I thought it then so good that I am sure it
would give me an unpleasant sensation now. Still, I wrote it because
I enjoyed doing so, quite as much as because I was hungry; and the couple
of guineas it brought me had as pleasant a ring as any money I ever
earned.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
